---
title:  "Nudging"
categories:  blog
permalink: blog-171114-nudging.html
tags: [blog, economics]
---

'Nudging' is a recent fad from within behavioural economics.
The aim of the nudge approach is both to
test non-coercive alternatives to traditional regulation and
to enhance cooperation between the public and the private sector. 

A *nudge* refers to
“any aspect of the choice architecture that alters people’s behavior
in a predictable way without forbidding any options
or significantly changing their economic incentives.
To count as a mere nudge, the intervention must be easy and cheap to avoid.
Nudges are not mandates.
Putting fruit at eye level counts as a nudge.
Banning junk food does not.

The use of nudges in public policy seems to be associated
to the broader processes of deregulation and privatization
in the context of financialization.

The focus on individual behaviour is consistent with a
neoliberal agenda
where the new approach to public policy enhances
the illusion of free individual choice. 

Deregulation and privatisation often
imposed greater choices on individuals (e.g. pensions).
Forced to make choices,
individuals were invited to regulate themselves
according to particular norms of behaviour.
Thus in consumer finance markets individuals must learn
the appropriate norms of credit and savings behaviour and
become financially literate.
More recently insights from behavioural economics have been
harnessed to ‘nudge’ individuals to change their behaviour”

Following the nudge approach, the responsibility for public welfare is shifted to individuals. In spite of encouraging active civic engagement, this approach to public policies seems to neglect the social constraints that restrain individual autonomy. Finally, it is worth noting that, while putting emphasis on individual behaviors and choices, the nudge approach dismisses the global increasing economic, social and political challenges at national, state and local levels.

[Maria Alejandra Madi: Why Nudging is bad](https://www.worldeconomicsassociation.org/newsletterarticles/nudges-dark-side/)

{% include links.html %}

