---
title: Urbanisation
keywords: urbanisation
last_updated: October 22, 2017
tags: [urbanisation]
summary: "Urbanisation"
sidebar: urb_sidebar
permalink: urb_intro.html
folder: urb
---

Introduction to the Urbanisation theme ...

### Urban social-ecological systems

The world is urbanizing at an unprecedented rate. In the near future it is prospected that urban landscapes converted for approximately 2,7 billion more people will be built. This is equivalent to the size of South Africa. Such urbanization, coupled with increasing inequalities, changing migration patterns, shifting diets and a growing urban middle class pose increasing demand for resources generated by the biosphere. People in cities, as elsewhere, must deal with an uncertain future due to globalization, climate change and loss of biological diversity.

[Stockhol Resilience Center](http://www.stockholmresilience.org/research/research-themes/urban.html)


### India's modernity

The expansions of the Indian economy after the globalisation reforms of 1991 have seen the rapid
growth of cities and towns. This process bypassed many of the formal models of 1950s urban
planning, which based urban settlement on zoning and formal title. Para-legal, and ‘pirate’ urbanism
has been distinctive of most Indian cities which exist largely through complex forms of tenure rather
than titled private property, porosity rather than visibility. This ‘pirate modernity,’ has shown itself
to be dynamic, and further aided by low cost technological communication networks. New liberal
arguments in India have suggested that informationalisation be transformed from tenure to title, cash
to banking, invisibility to visibility. The main strategy for this has been informational infrastructures
and biometric enumeration of the population.

Can the experiences of innovative informal/pirate modernities in Asia point to a new arrangement of
beyond purely property -based economies? Or can we update older models of the liberal normative
information commons with a new conceptual architecture that accounts for sections of the
population standing outside property or the classic commons? These would include looser, but
unpropertied forms of knowledge exchange as seen in informal production in India. In short, what
kind of questions does India and China’s emergence pose for a social theory of modernity beyond
property?

[sundaram pirate modernities](pdf/sundaram.pdf)


### Google Urbanism

#### A digital strategy for urban value extraction

GoogleUrbanism (GU) is a city management strategy making use of
Google’s insatiable hunger for capitalization of ‘attention’ and quality data.
Proposed by strategic urban designers/architects Nicolay Boyadjiev,
Harshavardhan Bhat, Kirill Rostovsky and Andréa Savard-Beaudoin,
GU intends to create a mutually beneficial relation between the
commercial interests of tech companies and the city as political
and social entity.
Cities more often than not have serious trouble to provide and
maintain the public services they’re supposed to deliver
and companies like Google are developing new business models in exploiting
the overlap between physical and digital space.
But those tech platforms are already profiting from the digital data and
attention of users in the physical world.
The GU team proposes to set new terms to this currently one-sided relationship
by adding ‘public space’ in the equation between Google, users and data,
framing it as the formal physical ‘site of extraction’ of this digital value.

The whole idea behind GoogleUrbanism is that every time Google makes money
in public space,
the public space gets something back and reinvests it in itself.


#### Remove annoying regulations - Privately run cities

Google's mother comapny, Alphabet, does take cities seriously.
Its executives have floated the idea of taking some struggling city –
Detroit? – and reinventing it around Alphabet services,
with no annoying regulations blocking this march of progress.


Google Urbanism - as the project is called - portends to use Alphabet’s
data prowess to build profitable alliances
with other powerful - i.e. financial - forces behind contemporary cities,
from property developers to institutional investors.

Toronto has recently chosen Alphabet to turn Quayside,
a 12-acre undeveloped waterfront area, into a digital marvel.
This might uncover whether Google Urbanism will transcend or
accommodate the predominantly financial forces shaping our cities.

Alphabet’s weapons are impressive.
Cheap, modular buildings to be assembled quickly;
sensors monitoring air quality and building conditions;
adaptive traffic lights prioritising pedestrians and cyclists;
parking systems directing cars to available slots.
Not to mention delivery robots,
advanced energy grids,
automated waste sorting, and, of course,
ubiquitous self-driving cars.

Alphabet essentially wants to be the default platform
for other municipal services.
Cities, it says, have always been platforms;
now they are simply going digital.
“The world’s great cities are all hubs of growth and innovation
because they leveraged platforms put in place by visionary leaders,”
states the proposal.
“Rome had aqueducts, London the Underground, Manhattan the street grid.”

Amid all this platformaphoria, one could easily forget that the street grid is not typically the property of a private entity.
Who determines the rules by which different companies get access to it? Would cities be saving energy using Alphabet’s own AI systems or would the platform be open to others?
Would Alphabet support “urban net neutrality” as actively as it
supports net neutrality of the conventional type?
In reality, there is no “digital grid”: there are just individual
Alphabet products.
Its bet is to furnish cool digital services
to *establish complete monopoly over data extractivism within a city*.
What passes for the efforts to build the “digital grid” might, in fact,
be an attempt to privatise municipal services.

Alphabet’s long-term goal is to remove barriers to the accumulation
and circulation of capital in urban settings –
mostly by *replacing formal rules and restrictions with softer,
feedback-based floating targets*.
It claims that in the past
“prescriptive measures were necessary to protect human health,
ensure safe buildings, and manage negative externalities”.
Today, however, everything has changed and
“cities can achieve those same goals
without the inefficiency that comes with inflexible zoning and
static building codes”.

For Alphabet, these constraints are no more:
ubiquitous and continuous data flows can finally
replace government rules with market signals.
Aaway with the rules, tests and standards,
let the sovereign consumer rank the service
and low-scoring ones will soon disappear on their own.
Google Urbanism means the end of politics -
Instead it wants to mobilise the power of technology
to help residents “adjust”.

Alphabet can 'democratise' space by customising it through data flows
and cheap, prefabricated materials.
The problem is that Alphabet’s 'democratisation' of function will
not be matched by the democratisation of control and ownership
of urban resources.
The “input” into Alphabet’s algorithmic democracy is
“market demand” rather than communal decision-making.

Instead of democratising ownership and control,
Alphabet promises participation, consultation
and new ways to track the vox populi –
measured automatically via Alphabet’s extensive sensory network.

In cities, market demand is precisely what leads to the
privatisation of public space.
Decisions are no longer taken in the political realm
but are delegated to asset managers, private equity groups,
and investment banks that flock to real estate and infrastructure
searching for stable and decent returns.
Google Urbanism would not reverse this trend, it would accelerate it.

Alphabet understands the real audience for its cities: the global rich.
For them, the narratives of data-driven sustainability and
algorithmically produced lifestyles
are just another way to justify rising values of their property portfolios.

[Volume](http://volumeproject.org/googleurbanism-working-with-the-system/)

[Evgeny Morozov](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/oct/21/google-urban-cities-planning-data)

[Strelka Insitute](http://googleurbanism.com/)

[Next Big Future](https://www.nextbigfuture.com/2017/10/google-urbanism-plans-data-extraction-from-smart-cities-but-splits-revenue-with-cities.html)





{% include links.html %}

